4.
Thought and Purpose Until thought is linked with purpose there
is no intelligent accomplishment. With the majority the bark of thought is allowed to
drift upon the ocean of life. Aimlessness is of ice, and such drifting must not continue
for him who would steer clear of catastrophe and destruction. They who have no central
purpose in their life fall in easy prey to petty worries, fears, troubles, and self-pityings,
all of which are indications of weakness, which lead, just as surely as deliberately planned
sins though by a different route, to failure, unhappiness, and loss, for weakness cannot
persist in a power-evolving universe. A man should conceive of a legitimate purpose in his
heart and set out to accomplish it. He should make this purpose the centralizing point of his
thoughts. It may take the form of a spiritual ideal, or it may be a worldly object according
to his nature at the time being. But whichever it is, he should steadily focus his thought forces
upon the object which he has set before him. He should make his purpose his supreme duty,
and should devote himself to its attainment, not allowing his thoughts to wander away into
ephemeral fancies, longings, and imaginings. This is the royal road to self-control and true
concentration of thought. Even if he fails again and again to accomplish his purpose,
as he necessarily must until weakness is overcome, the strength of character gained will be the
measure of his true success, and this will form a new starting point for future power and triumph.
Those who are not prepared for the apprehension of great purpose should fix the thoughts upon
the faultless performance of their duty, no matter how insignificant their task may appear. Only in
this way can the thoughts be gathered and focused, and resolution and energy be developed,
which being done there is nothing which may not be accomplished. The weakest soul,
knowing its own weakness and believing this truth, that strength can only be developed by
effort and practice, will at once begin to exert itself, and adding effort to effort,
patience to patience, and strength to strength, will never cease to develop,
and will at last grow divinely strong. As the physically weak man can make himself strong by
careful and patient training, so the man of weak thoughts can make them strong by exercising
himself in right thinking. To put away aimlessness and weakness, and to begin to think with purpose,
is to enter the ranks of those strong ones who only recognize failure as one of the pathways to
attainment, who make all conditions serve them, and who think strongly, attempt fearlessly,
and accomplish masterfully. Having conceived of his purpose, a man should mentally mark out a
pathway to his achievement, looking neither to the right nor the left. Doubts and fears should
be rigorously excluded. They are disintegrating elements which break up the straight line of
effort, rendering it crooked, ineffectual, useless. Thoughts of doubt and fear never
accomplish anything, and never can. They always lead to failure. Purpose, energy, power to do,
and all strong thoughts cease when doubt and fear creep in. The will to do springs from the
knowledge that we can do. Doubt and fear are the great enemies of knowledge, and he who encourages
them, who does not slay them, thwarts himself at every step. He who has conquered doubt and fear
has conquered failure. His every thought is allied with power, and all difficulties are
bravely met and wisely overcome. His purposes are seasonably planted, and they bloom and bring
forth fruit which does not fall prematurely to the ground. Thought allied fearlessly to purpose
becomes creative force. He who knows this is ready to become something higher and stronger than a mere
bundle of wavering thoughts and fluctuating sensations. He who does this has become the
conscious and intelligent wielder of his mental powers.